The Core Problem: GraalPy is Not CPython
Layer 1: The ctypes Callback Problem (Current Blocker)

pypdfium2 wraps libpdfium, a native C library. To pass Python data (such as a BytesIO buffer) into that C library, it relies on ctypes callbacks — Python functions converted into C function pointers at runtime.

Simplified Example
# Inside pypdfium2 (simplified)
GetBlock = ctypes.CFUNCTYPE(...)      # Define C function signature
callback = GetBlock(my_python_function)  # Convert Python function → C pointer
Failure Point

This conversion is not supported in GraalPy.

CPython provides a stable C ABI that allows Python functions to be exposed as callable C function pointers.
GraalPy runs on the JVM and does not expose a compatible C ABI.
As a result, native code cannot call back into Python via function pointers.
Observed Error
Cannot convert Object pointer to native
Key Insight

Your fix:

POINTER(None) → c_void_p

only resolves a type annotation issue, not the core problem.

The failure is architectural, not syntactic.
It cannot be patched with small fixes.

Layer 2: PDF Loading Path Has No Escape

You identified a potential workaround:

Use a file path instead of an in-memory buffer
This would ideally trigger:
FPDF_LoadDocument (path-based)
instead of FPDF_LoadMemDocument (buffer + callback)
Why This Matters
Function	Requires Callbacks
FPDF_LoadMemDocument	Yes
FPDF_LoadDocument	No
The Problem

pypdfium2.PdfDocument abstracts this decision:

It inspects input types internally
It may still convert file paths into buffers
It likely routes everything through the memory-loading path
Implication

Even if docling passes a file path:

You cannot guarantee callback-free execution
The callback requirement may still be triggered internally
Workaround Options
Option A — Minimal C PDF Text Extractor

Build a lightweight custom C library:

~500 lines of code
Dependencies:
zlib
Features:
Basic PDF parsing
Text extraction only
Advantages
No Skia
No complex dependency graph
Easily compiled to LLVM bitcode
Works with GraalVM
Tradeoff
Breaks compatibility with current docling architecture
Requires custom parsing logic
Option B — Use MuPDF Instead of PDFium

Switch from PDFium to MuPDF.

Benefits
Much smaller and cleaner codebase
Fewer dependencies
No Skia
No PartitionAlloc
More realistic LLVM bitcode compilation
Notes
Some SIMD usage exists but is more optional than in PDFium
API is simpler and more predictable
Layer 4: The Architectural Mismatch
GraalVM Strengths
Polyglot execution (Java ↔ Python ↔ JS)
JVM-based interoperability
Works well with:
Pure Python
Simple C extensions
Docling Stack Reality

Docling depends on:

pypdfium2 (native + callbacks)
torch (heavy native backend)
lxml (C extensions)
Other low-level libraries
Core Conflict
GraalPy	Docling Stack
JVM-based runtime	CPython-native ecosystem
Limited C ABI support	Heavy reliance on native bindings
No callback-compatible ctypes	Requires callbacks
Conclusion

These systems are fundamentally incompatible.

GraalPy is suitable for:

Pure Python logic
Lightweight extensions

Docling is built on:

Deep native integrations
CPython-specific behavior
Bottom Line
This is not a bug
This is not patchable
This is an architectural incompatibility
If you want GraalVM to work:

You must either:

Replace native-heavy dependencies (PDFium, Torch, etc.)
Or introduce a native bridge layer outside GraalPy
Recommendation

Start with:

A minimal proof-of-concept (custom C extractor), or
A migration to MuPDF

before attempting full pipeline compatibility.
